README.md, before:

# Uniswap V3 Development Book (🚧 NOT FINISHED YET 🚧)

This book will teach how to develop an advanced decentralized application! Specifically, we'll be building a clone of 
[Uniswap V3](https://uniswap.org/), which is a decentralized exchange.

## Why Uniswap?
- It implements a very simple mathematical concept, `x * y = k`, which still makes it very powerful.
- It's an advanced application that has a thick layer of engineering on top of the simple formula.
- It's permissionless and battle-tested. Learning from an application that's been running in production for
several years and handling billions of dollars will make you a better developer.

## What we'll build

![Front-end application screenshot](/screenshot.png)

We'll build a full clone of Uniswap V3. It **won't be an exact copy** and it **won't be production-ready** because we'll
do something in our own way and we'll **definitely** introduce multiple bugs. So, don't deploy this to the mainnet!

While our focus will primarily be on smart contracts, we'll also build a front-end application as a side hustle. 🙂
I'm not a front-end developer and I cannot make a front-end application better than you, but I can show you how a
decentralized exchange can be integrated into a front-end application.

The full code of what we'll build is stored in a separate repository:

https://github.com/Jeiwan/uniswapv3-code

You can read this book at:

https://uniswapv3book.com/

## Table of Contents

TODO

## Running locally

To run the book locally:
1. Install [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).
1. Clone the repo:
  ```shell
  $ git clone https://github.com/Jeiwan/uniswapv3-book
  $ cd uniswapv3-book
  ```
1. Run:
  ```shell
  $ hugo server -D
  ```
1. Visit http://localhost:1313/ (or whatever URL the previous command outputs!)


### TODO
1. Fix the padding before <katext>
1. MOVE TO MILESTONE 2: Tick math implementation. Explanation of the math in [TickMath](https://github.com/Uniswap/v3-core/blob/main/contracts/libraries/TickMath.sol) contract.

Commit message:

'Tick Bitmap Index' proofreading done

README.md, after:

# Uniswap V3 Development Book (🚧 NOT FINISHED YET 🚧)

This book will teach how to develop an advanced decentralized application! Specifically, we'll be building a clone of 
[Uniswap V3](https://uniswap.org/), which is a decentralized exchange.

## Why Uniswap?
- It implements a very simple mathematical concept, `x * y = k`, which still makes it very powerful.
- It's an advanced application that has a thick layer of engineering on top of the simple formula.
- It's permissionless and battle-tested. Learning from an application that's been running in production for
several years and handling billions of dollars will make you a better developer.

## What we'll build

![Front-end application screenshot](/screenshot.png)

We'll build a full clone of Uniswap V3. It **won't be an exact copy** and it **won't be production-ready** because we'll
do something in our own way and we'll **definitely** introduce multiple bugs. So, don't deploy this to the mainnet!

While our focus will primarily be on smart contracts, we'll also build a front-end application as a side hustle. 🙂
I'm not a front-end developer and I cannot make a front-end application better than you, but I can show you how a
decentralized exchange can be integrated into a front-end application.

The full code of what we'll build is stored in a separate repository:

https://github.com/Jeiwan/uniswapv3-code

You can read this book at:

https://uniswapv3book.com/

## Table of Contents

TODO

## Running locally

To run the book locally:
1. Install [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).
1. Clone the repo:
  ```shell
  $ git clone https://github.com/Jeiwan/uniswapv3-book
  $ cd uniswapv3-book
  ```
1. Run:
  ```shell
  $ hugo server -D
  ```
1. Visit http://localhost:1313/ (or whatever URL the previous command outputs!)


### TODO
1. Fix the padding before <katext>
1. Milestone 2, Tick Bitmap Index: what happens when there are no ticks? Will it keep looping until it reaches max/min tick?
1. MOVE TO MILESTONE 2: Tick math implementation. Explanation of the math in [TickMath](https://github.com/Uniswap/v3-core/blob/main/contracts/libraries/TickMath.sol) contract.
